[Music]
everybody welcome to another episode of
conversations with Tom I am here with
somebody that I am very excited to have
a conversation with Eric Weinstein thank
you so much for joining me man I've
watched so many videos with you and I
think you have an extraordinary way of
breaking things down in a hyper logical
way so I thought this would be a lot of
fun and we bumped into each other at the
talks at teal is aptly called teal talks
that's right it's a series yes
which you guys sadly aren't releasing
which I'm horrified by at least one and
that's the one that your dude that you
did with werner herzog right but that is
your show which I'm very excited about
called the portal which I want to start
there I should I want to understand this
concept so I'm obsessed with the movie
The Matrix
and when I say obsessed I really think
it is the perfect metaphor for the human
condition it's become the dominant
metaphor of my life I think about it all
the time when I'm trying to explain to
people the trajectory of my own life
like that is the perfect thing there was
a period where I was stuck in the matrix
I had no sense that there were rules to
the world that some of them could be
bent and broken and all that and that I
could completely change the outcome that
I got by changing the way that I think
about the world and so you said that the
matrix and other movies like that are a
metaphor for something that is real what
is that real thing well I think that
that you're pointing to it that in
essence it is by analogy talking about
the real world and once you make the
connections I mean I don't know whether
you're really down for all three funds
literally down oh oh the other two no I
did not think they were good well
there's part there's a part of - that's
necessary which part would that well
they architects speech probably what
part I don't remember - and three well I
was just full disclosure for years I
used to pretend they didn't exist I feel
I hate them so much I need to re-watch
them let's stick with one of the things
Oh
perfect okay yeah I think one was almost
unbeatable I mean there was one serious
flaw where humans were being used for
batteries rather than computation I
don't know quite why they did that
but it the way I saw it was that it was
talking about the very real state of our
world in which we are expected to
believe some sort of cradle to grave
illusion the world that has been pulled
over our eyes and by turning it into a
sci-fi context they were able to talk
about it very directly and you see this
for example in Islam where everybody
understands what the metaphors are and
that there are certain ways that you can
bring up very dangerous topics through
indirection
and that's the way I saw it was it was a
non-fiction picture discussing our
actual world through a layer of
indirection so that it wouldn't be
called a documentary I actually have a
shirt that says The Matrix was a
documentary and obviously I wear it
tongue-in-cheek but there there is
something so my whole bent in life is
that and I probably take a far more
simplistic approach than you do and I
actually want to talk to you about how
consciousness comes into being which
normally I'm not interested in but I
think you might have some interesting
insights but when I think about the fact
that what we're looking at really is a
virtual interpretation of the stimulus
coming into our brain and it was David
Eagleman who first gave me the way to
think about it and he said think of it
this way your brain is encased in total
darkness and yet you feel like light is
actually reaching your brain but in fact
it's not it's hitting your eye it's
being translated into neural chemical
signals or electrochemical signals and
your brain is interpreting it and you
create this reality that's good enough
that you don't bump into too much [__]
but the reality is that it's it is not a
one-for-one representation of existence
and even if you just think about the
spectrum of light is already so narrowed
in terms of what we're able to interpret
you just start thinking about okay wait
a second if this is if this isn't a
one-for-one representation of reality
how much of my belief system to keep it
really simple how much of my belief
system is shaping what I see and that
was like the first thread that I started
to pull out and then it was the brain is
plastic and you can make you can
actually change the physical structures
and function of your brain
and that was all coming to me at a time
where I felt hopelessly lost and I felt
like I was too stupid to succeed you you
might actually know this reference have
you seen Amadeus the movie a long time
ago right there's a character in there
called solely airy and solely airy I
used to yeah yeah okay thank you so I I
have long thought it was a real dude and
the the punch line to his character is
that he laments to God he said why did
you make me just good enough to realize
how much better Mozart is and that
haunted him and it was like make me an
imbecile leave me to the point where I
can't understand this [__] guy's
genius and I'm fine then I can just go
about my day and enjoy his music or make
me as good or better than him but don't
put me in this weird purgatory of I'm
good enough to realize that he's truly
extraordinary and that I'll never be
that good and so I graduate college and
that's exactly how I felt I'm just smart
enough to realize how dumb I really am
and that was emotionally destructive and
I was in a super super dark place and it
was that what obviously didn't have the
realization at that time but it ends up
being this understanding that my I'm
contributing to my brains interpretation
of the world and if I switch this belief
from I'm just smart enough to realize
how dumb I am to realizing that humans
can learn then my entire life will
change and that began the obsession with
the matrix so we have a few open threads
here we've got a David Eagleman tear
respective of the brain in a jar with
the law from Descartes and the idea that
for example you and I have never met I
sit here in my I mean just assuming that
we actually our brains encased in a
skull I sit here in my jar you sit here
in yours and we have the illusion that
somehow we have met in a context but in
fact there has been no no direct contact
so how do you deal with this and I think
what's been fascinating for me is
watching the world let's say wake up to
the the dress or the yani Laurel puzzles
and suddenly Laurel what's that well
remember the dress was it was a black
and blue or white and gold oh yeah I
didn't know what it's called alright
then you hear some audio and somebody
says oh he said Laurel
the person says no it was eme and you
realize that after a while your friend
is not pulling your leg that in fact we
are seeing totally different worlds now
I grew up colorblind and so my brother
and I share the exact same color
blindness so we were always in perfect
agreement and our parents you know it
would sort of freak out if one of them
left town because then it would be two
against one and clearly our reality was
right in theirs was wrong yeah so that
you you do learn that your oom felt that
that world that you can see or perceive
or taste or touch or understand get
shifted I don't know I just checked my
my Wi-Fi when I was in the green room in
order to see what what networks were
available but I can't see them in here
because I need I need an aid and so in
essence we don't think of that as being
like a jailbreak out of our own belt but
that's what it is and that's what the
portal concept is all about once you
become convinced that you're not
actually in the real world that the
stories that are being fed to you were
manifestly untrue that the entire social
construction is not what it appears to
be that there are hidden passages
trapdoors panic rooms everywhere it
becomes pretty addictive because you
can't imagine that you never noticed
this before now so I want to I want to
get into like what some of these are
like in functioning reality because I
know that you're you seem pretty serious
about your love of finding these moments
that are these portals into another
world and I've also heard you talk about
like actual space travel like how much
of this is shifting your perspective and
just like oh I'm seeing life you know
through somebody else's lense and how
much of this is like know a fundamental
based reality were we're sort of
altering the state of consciousness kind
of thing well it's an interesting
question the altered consciousness issue
whether you're trying to get through
through mindfulness psychedelics silent
retreat there are brain states that many
people have never experienced so for
example
I did not understand that there are
programs in my mind that are like fire
extinguishers in a house you've lived in
for several years if you've never had a
fire you've never used the extinguisher
however it doesn't mean the program
isn't there and they run an only under
exotic circumstance is it a real example
well a real example would be when your
hygiene drops below a certain level I
find that my risk-taking changes
character and that once I've had a
shower my risk-taking goes back to its
previous state I didn't know that until
I was on a trek across the great
Himalayan range in in Kashmir and we
went several days without showers and it
got really pretty ranked and more or
less risk just started taking all sorts
of completely insane risks like really
serious and you think that was tied to
the hygiene well I went out with other
people who were maybe influencing that I
would have thought that maybe I mean it
was wasn't controlled and then we found
a waterfall wish to take a shower and
suddenly I was back to my old reasonably
liked one shower was enough to kick me
back into my previous setting I've never
heard anyone else discuss this but it
was a pretty clean you know probably
took you know ten minutes at post shower
I was back to worrying about what the
risks were whoa that's really really
interesting and not to derail too far
down that particular rabba hoax I and I
want to come back out and help me
remember this if I forget I want to come
back out to the concept of portals but
for a second so as a father I'm sure you
think about this kind of thing like so
if I think about all right we have these
mechanisms they've been honed over
millions of years of evolution to exist
in a certain way and now we exist in
this relatively I mean in terms of the
the scope of life on earth this is a
[__] blip like we are living in the
span of a single blink in terms of like
the stretch of time so we haven't really
evolved for the circumstances in which
we live and if you know that all right
just not taking a shower for a few days
completely changes my relationship to
risk what does living in a city do what
does technology do like you must begin
to ask yourself questions about how do i
shape my kids
physical reality or do I want to write
exactly like me okay so people talk
about forest bathing I want to [__]
Tokyo bathe I want to go to a deeper
more densely populated metropolis right
I don't understand my own like fetish
with robots and stuff like that but dude
when I say I'm literally wearing a ring
with a robot face on it okay I've got a
thing so like do you think about that
like do I just leave things the way they
are do I shove my kid through a portal
of like back to nature go live on an
organic farm like that kind of thing or
well both I mean in part I want them to
spend time and what is closer to what
you were describing is evolutionary
theorists call it lazy ei EE ei what
does the environment of evolutionary
adapted okay this is our mythological
savanna home in which presumably were
just like oh okay this is this is what
these these fingers and opposable thumbs
were for right so then why do you want
to do that well because in part that's
where most of as you mean I'm just
riffing off what you were saying but are
you sign up from a health perspective
like that's what I think about mental
health physical health it just seems
like if I wouldn't parent I'd probably
be pushing them in that way well
wouldn't it be crazy not to spend at
least a decent chunk where you were
maximally adapted to make use of all of
the millennia that you're talking about
so that that would be my dad there is a
base assumption hiding in that but if
you're right so the base assumption
hiding in that is that it would be I
think you were saying that the base
assumption is there would be a higher
degree of alignment maybe the right word
spiritually physically so that there's a
sense of deeper gratification or peace
or joy or pleasure or something positive
yes you know when the grid goes down to
suddenly all the things that you've been
depending upon that are electricity
based cease to function yes or when
supply chains break down so I was in New
York City when there was a hurricane and
I couldn't get a D batteries to save my
life
so we live we live in a very I guess on
top of very thin crust so it's good to
have an idea of what happens when that
crust breaks and you might have to start
a fire without matches it makes sense to
have an idea that you can go for a
period of time without food lots of
different reasons so printed
yep trying to bring bringing all these
things at home at some level we're
riding on a technological substrate and
so it would be crazy to say no you kids
need to learn how to push a plow because
this word-processing thing might not
work out
on the other hand you want them to spend
time closer to where humans have spent
most of their evolutionary history and
you want them to be able to navigate the
stack to understand how they got here so
you know the same people who might
operate a slingshot might have shot a
bow and arrow might have shot a rifle
you know and have an idea of the
evolution that is the Taser so you want
people to have an idea from whence they
came and what is that thing and then you
want them to be absolutely in the moment
making use of all the things that we
have now I find that the internet and
digital consumption has totally changed
the micro chunking of my attention you
can't really easily understand what life
was like before the internet if this is
your only context and can you explain
micro chunking well remember when it was
you know I tell a joke sometimes that I
don't think Twitter's negatively
affected my attention span because I
could still get through most of the
longer tweets in one sitting
it's good yeah so that problem of why is
it that I can only pay attention to tiny
punchy things has to do with being
habituated to wanting an instant
gratification I don't want to put in the
time the energy the work to decode
things that you know there's no Canon so
I have no you know you and I have really
spent very little time together if I
start referencing a poem I think of that
as me throwing a frisbee what are the
odds you're gonna catch that
intellectual object I don't know we're a
little bit shifted Sheryl oh yeah right
but if I use a song hip-hop lyrics yeah
okay I'm with you yeah but you can you
know people pass hip-hop lyrics past me
all the time and as a result most of us
are not catching the
the frisbees thrown our way and so it's
a lower level of communication I'd be
happier let's say using the indian
canons if we all agreed on the same
reference point or the western canon or
you know the buddhist canon but
something where we can actually go deep
as opposed to just floor explore the
surface of this kind of cultural and
intellectual diversity which has a lot
to offer but most of us just don't have
don't have deep architectural
programming that prepares us for how
deep the mind can go yeah so the notion
of portals is that tied to how deep the
mind can go or is this is the notion of
a portal to shake somebody out of there
sort of they're stuck in the the pink
liquid and they don't realize they're in
the matrix is that is that the moment of
the portal or is the portal something
that is glimpses into a mathematical
reality that the world that we're
experiencing has some sort of what I'm
gonna call fabric because I'm just
terrible at math and physics and all
that fascinated yes but I don't really
understand it I heard you make reference
one time to a type of number that you
said we just can't explain it octuplets
octonal octo nians thank you
and you said but it really has existence
in like physical reality or something
like that and I was like huh so I want
to to really understand your tradition
of the portals so is this an
intellectual exercise or is this really
grabbing a punching through to the
fabric of reality okay so let's talk
about huge wins huge win for me would be
to take let's say some sector of the
world that feels fenced out of math or
music or language or whatever and give
them three superpowers so let me imagine
for example that they got turned onto
the idea that there was really deep math
all around them
that strangely was more advanced than
the stuff that they studied in school
but they found it easier to understand
and that they had always thought that
they were bad at math
and now suddenly they can't get it off
then with music let's imagine that
you're you're convinced that you're
hopeless in music you can't do anything
you're just not a musical person and I
give you a coffee mug and a guitar and
within five minutes you realize that you
can play 85% of the songs that mean
something to you by following some very
simple instructions are you saying I
can't do language I studied Spanish in
school and if I ever have to hear about
you know Sarah versus a star or
irregular verbs or why is it el agua I'm
gonna shoot myself and then I say okay
well what about we take you to Indonesia
and in the space of a couple of weeks
suddenly if you're not the most greatest
indonesian speaker you're rockin and
rollin in a language that you never
thought possible that it has not that
much to do with english those
superpowers once you've seen the first
one you're like wow i didn't realize
that i could actually just do this i
must be a mistake let me give you a
second data point anyway wow that's
really interesting that now i've got two
things that do my belt by the third one
almost everyone has the idea oh my god
the entire world is just miss explained
and i think it's that idea that nobody
talks about the octo nians and then you
run off to wikipedia and they're there
or for example i've had this really
great experience where i was able to
point at this thing called the hopf
fibration on the Joe Rogan program
visually and some people got really
angry like he's pointing it but he's not
explaining it and I don't get it but you
know I didn't get angry but I was like
what the [__] is he talking what is he
talking about why is it the most
important thing in the world why you
know okay well the first thing is to
just plant the flag like there is
something here and you can if you if you
hear somebody who you like all the stuff
that they're talking about when you can
understand them and then and then
suddenly they go out of the visible
spectrum and into the infrared or
something you say okay can I follow is
there any way so you start doing a
little bit of research and I'm finding
now
that I've just been you know talking to
this artist Niko Meyer who in his shop
in Temecula is machining massive hop
vibrations he was a little bit aware of
it and then he saw the Rogan program and
so now he's like trying to build these
things since we're starting to
collaborate on art projects to just push
this out has him into visualize a
vibration or actually create a hot
vibration to to actually create parts of
the hopf fibration that can be seen
touched displayed what I did on Rogan
was to show a representation of the hopf
fibration pushed on to a two-dimensional
screen representing three-dimensional
screen representing a three-dimensional
sphere in 4-dimensional space
blah-blah-blah-blah-blah
so this would be one layer of those
abstractions taken away where you now
you're maybe you're able to walk around
this and suddenly just like all those
cool asure paintings that took over the
world suddenly people are saying okay
there is something discovered in 1931 by
Heinz Hopf that nobody ever told me
about and I was just like expecting to
talk about mushrooms and wolves and you
know mixed martial arts and then
suddenly there's this thing intruding
into my life and that thing may turn out
to be the person's calling in life
because how if you don't even know this
stuff is there if you don't know that
you're in a matrix and that there is
Zion mmm you can't make a decision like
if you want to stay in your pod and just
be in the GUP I'm not going to that's
your choice but at least you should know
that there's a vacation destination
called Zion and a revolution that's
brewing and so if you're interested in
that lifestyle that might be a choice
you might be interested in making so let
me articulate that back to you I think
now I completely understand what you're
talking about with portals so portals to
me sound exactly like the matrix being a
very perfect metaphor obviously taking
to the extreme but where you're seeing
things one way because you don't like
you said the world has been explained
poorly so you don't understand that
there's a simple shift you could make
and now see things in a totally
different way I'm not sure if this is
the piece of art you were talking about
when you said the MC Escher drawings
took over but I remember back in the
probably early 90s they
were these really weirdly colored
posters and they had like an ultra
simplistic like it maybe it had a
ballerina in one pose and so you're
looking at it doesn't look like much and
then if you relax your eyes it would
suddenly become three-dimensional and I
remember the first time somebody said no
no there's really an image there it's a
ballerina in 3d and I was like I don't
see anything like use my visual noise is
it two of those no I read that stare
even if I remember right when you were
when you first look at it you don't see
anything you just see waves like colory
waves got it and I remember somebody was
standing in front of a staring I'm like
why staring and they're like no the
ballerinas kind of cool and I'm like
what are you talking about there's no
ballerina they're like no no there is
and that's what are you talking about
they said look it's this thing you have
to relax your eyes and if you relax your
eyes like focus your eyes like you're
looking past it it might be random-dot
stereogram okay random-dot stereogram so
I'm standing in front of it and I'm like
you are lying literally yeah like this
I'm on [__] punks like somebody is
filming me there's nothing here I'm
looking at it I'm doing what you're
telling and then all of a sudden you
figure out what to do physically and
this thing jumps out you're like what
the fairy discreet very fascinating it
really shows you that this this thing
that has been sitting in front of you
has been there the whole time you didn't
know how to look at it because you
didn't know what to do you're a whole
world was a thing you're a mathematician
you're a linguist you're a computer
programmer you know you're a musician
you're doing improv you you're doing all
of these things that you felt fenced out
of and the thing that got me really
crazy was that due to some of my
learning issues I did not have an easy
time in school and I watched it was very
much a Cinderella story where you're
watching all of the all of the smart
kids go to the ball and you're sitting
at home washing dishes try to figure why
is it my punctuation random spelling
impressionistic capitalization holding
me back why is everyone else I'd be able
to pull a piece of paper that's you know
neat and legible and mine is crumpled
and folded and I don't even know what my
assignment is how old you at this point
oh I would say that between age 10 and
16 I cannot buy a base hit to save my
life and I'm
existing on charm and do people at this
point think you're not very bright I
wouldn't say that I would say that
they've got a problem because smart and
trying are supposed to result in success
so what happens when you have somebody
that you believe is smart you believe is
trying seems to be good at lots of
things that aren't on the on the agenda
now you've got a problem because that
person is validating the educational
system so the system gets angry at you
it tries but there's a very limited help
budget that's available and before too
long what you're doing is you're
revealing what I call teaching
disabilities because people don't have
the time the energy the understanding
necessary to help and reach that person
they don't even know what's going wrong
and so what you're doing is is that
you're invalidating what I would call
the educational complex and the
educational complex is a it's a guild
it's a profession as a business and so
one of the things I believe is that
we're not taught subjects that machs in
a way that maximally benefits the
largest number of learners we're taught
subjects due to the political economy of
making these subjects take a very long
time and rewarding the specialty that
might have been the career choice of the
person teaching that's super [__]
interesting so what teaching method
would optimize for the greatest number
of learners well first of all
differential diagnosis like are you a
are you mean are you a visual learner
are you an auditory learner and we now
segment them out right and you know you
start to understand you present several
different styles you know let's do some
a be testing use like you go to your
optometrist this is better like this or
like this
right and so you start to understand
somebody's learning style and learning
profile okay going that's really [__]
simple and wonderfully interesting hard
to execute people can stop with the hate
mail but like ducks okay even better I
was being very
preemptive so keep going this is really
[__] interesting and you know then
you start doing things that nobody does
like for example most errors that we
make are not random errors if you start
collecting the errors that I used to do
teach learning disabled kids in college
for some extra shekels right and what I
noticed is is that people would make the
same errors all the time and so I could
just tell by recording what answer they
gave you know if you give them six times
eight
sometimes they're gonna say forty two
sometimes they're gonna say fifty-six
whatever you're gonna have some
collection of things that you can guess
what they did to get there very seldom
are they gonna say a chicken salad
sandwich fair all right and then you
need to incarcerate that person because
it sounds dangerous
so in such circumstances if you just
collect errors you can very quickly
figure out what you're supposed to be
remediating rather than just saying you
lost me there so your first step sounded
[__] awesome and the school system
should immediately implement X it sounds
scalable the second one detecting errors
and knowing what they mean yeah mmm
give me say it another way because that
one as I as my brain tries to process
that it doesn't seem scalable well if I
say to you what is two plus three and
you give me the answer 23 yeah I bet I
know what you did okay you concatenated
two strings rather than adding two
integers but how does that become a
curriculum style like visual auditory
got it well because now I have it I have
technology that can very quickly figure
out what you're likely doing wrong okay
where if I were to time how long it's
taking you on some step I could guess
all you didn't know how to set up the
problem right all sorts of things that
happen winds whence that when things
aren't going right just imagine that
your brain and your body are giving off
data and that data can be measured when
things aren't working to guess where the
roadblocks are because in general we
don't have a million different
roadblocks when we're trying to learn
something I want to bring this back this
is simple example assume that we're
talking about the Big Bang right and
we're talking about
expanding universe and I said he you
don't even understand man it's just so
crazy not only is the universe expanding
its expanding at an accelerating rate my
contention is almost no one has any idea
what that means the physicists will say
that a million times
I think I know what it means and I have
no idea why anyone says it because
anyone smart should hear that and say
expanding into what what does that even
mean
and so I know what sorts of errors
people are going to make they're not
that original most of us get tripped up
making the same kinds of errors is like
a thousand other people out of ten
thousand people would make and so if you
just if you monitor these sorts of
things it's diagnostic data for you to
use I think that's a super interesting
way to think about the educational
system of doing a lot of detective work
Diagnostics figuring out like how to
group people they did that back in band
when I was in fifth grade going into six
like play this do you have any like
where do you show any sort of natural
aptitude and they segment people out
that's super interesting now coming back
to what you were talking about earlier
with the you let me take you to
Indonesia and show you that you can
actually pick this language up fast let
me give you the mug and the guitar and
you know let me show you a few things
let's make those real what what are cuz
I heard I've never heard you talk about
but actually heard your brother talk
about it when referencing you that you
do have this sort of freakish ability to
identify like what those key things are
here I do is that guitar tuned is an
entirely different limit but yes would
you like me to have somebody get it well
yeah just just to play just to see
whether you get anything at it might
might be a dud I don't know it could be
a total dud we'll get that we're gonna
take a big [__] risk here and josh has
since I know you're listening right now
if you could have Lisa who should know
where the guitar is hiding but it's
behind the door of my closet bring it
down we will continue the conversation
until it gets here and it would be great
to do it with an empty coffee mug just
to make the point that was a real thing
yeah okay so we'll also need an empty
coffee and if it's a if its acoustic
that would be a plus B's acoustic I
don't have anything
all right god I hope it has strings on
it I haven't had that thing out in a
very long time do you play I did play
and I never got good but I did enjoy it
and so back in the day before I started
on my entrepreneurial journey I was on I
I would not so much anymore but I used
to self-identify as an artist so my life
was all about the creation of art my
primary form of creation is writing so I
spent a lot of time writing I wanted to
get into writing music the crazy thing
is just today I heard you talk about I'm
gonna [__] up his last name mic isn't
your eysan eysan ger yeah from Incubus
yes so awesome that exact period of my
life was an obsession with Incubus and
trying to learn some of their songs on
the guitar and never got good but I
wrote songs for my wife who was my
then-girlfriend and to this day she
wishes I played more so that I would
write her more songs that's really nice
I did like that that gave me the impetus
to really like push myself and try to
get good but then it became a question
of time management and so it fell lower
on my priority list and and has thus
collected dust but finding a way to
learn things fast that is incredibly
interesting especially if you know the
notion of the portals become real and
there are these insights so my obsession
the whole reason that I create content
because I I know we don't know each
other well so you don't know this about
me but what I'm actually trying to do is
build a studio a film studio film and TV
okay because I believe that the way to
impact people is to make the next Kung
Fu Panda or the next Star Wars something
that has a message at its core but
entertains people hits them at a limbic
level it's an emotional connection
probably gonna have to focus on youth
that bums me out because while I really
enjoy that and I've always wanted that
to be a part of it I don't want to give
up on adults which is if you know
Geoffrey Canada is very much his advice
but hitting people at an impressionable
moment in their life whether that's
youth or they're just open with
something that resonates emotionally
that is able to incept them with a
portal I'm very much using your language
on that I would normally think of it as
growth mindset or whatever but your
incepting them in a moment with a portal
that causes their they're also more
violent then I
love it because I love that kind of [__]
so let's use violent language I'm in it
in fact know that anytime in the future
since I'm going to adopt the word portal
okay that it just comes with a TM and
your name so I'm certainly not trying to
rip it off but I would help popularize
it belong to us all and I think that
that's you know really important to me
is that the portal story like the matrix
is a universal and if you think about it
neo just to see how well I remember the
film you know neo is kind of searching
for something he's leading this
underground lifestyle by night and he's
sort of pieced together that there's a
something and this is what brings
Trinity into his life where a Trinity is
gonna go out and contact him and let him
know that if he follows the white rabbit
with an obvious homage to Lewis Carroll
so that the portal story within a portal
story and he you know he goes into this
Australian S&M Club which is very funny
that this is his introduction to a world
in which Morpheus is going to take him
through the looking-glass and that scene
of waking up you know in a completely
different context I think is it is the
violence of the portal I love that Neil
Strauss called me out one time he said
all your [__] language is violent
like what is that about my creation is
an act of violence how can I pretend
that that's exactly why I do it I don't
know why I do it but that feels so
wonderful well you have to break
something
right and you know if you think about
how we come into this world are our
mothers water breaks and that is a
moment in which that's a [__] portal
right and literally this is something
that I find mind-blowing in the Jewish
tradition Passover is about the escape
from Egypt which whose name is mitzrayim
which is a plural masculine plural and
it's the narrow places and it is the
literal birth story of the Jewish people
out of Egypt do you think there are some
people that just get I I have a
hypothesis that goes like this
some people think in archetypal metaphor
I'm not one of those people and it
actually
as I think held me back as a writer I've
had to really like learn that or do you
think that it is some people dream in
archetypes which is another reason that
I think that or is it that just over
these stories that we think of now as
archetype are told sort of bit by bit by
bit and and shaped over time based on
what gets a reaction you need you know
the simple-minded have devils and angels
on their shoulders one step up from that
you have Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson
whispering in opposite ears and you need
a camp and D camp between the
hyper-rational now of course I've been
unfair to them both Jordan as a
scientist and Sam is a pretty spiritual
guy but they're archetypes Sam is
constantly reminding us for the need of
the need for rationality and that
spiritualism can be grounded in
rationality and Jordan is really
reminding us that if you don't actually
just let that spirit free that your mind
has the spiritual capacity built into it
yeah there's there's danger on either
side if you're too rational or too
spiritual and - moved by the archetype
in both directions lies nonsense but
that tension is is magical have you read
The Watchmen the by Michael Moore the
comic the graphic yeah yeah so there's a
part in there if you remember the book
is broken into you've got the main story
and then you have snippets from like a
book
somebody's journal a diary that kind of
thing and one of the snippets in there
this hit me so [__] hard was a guy
had written a book on ornithology and he
said you know the problem with
ornithology was just to study birds
the problem with ornithology is that we
know the size of the feathers we know
the orientation of the feet and we can
tell you you know the gap between the
feathers and you know down to the
millimeter and what it all means and all
that he said but we've lost the poetry
of flight and we've lost the sense of
awe that a bird could inspire that made
it such a symbol that we would put it on
coins or on temples and he said
I never want to get to that point where
I'm so blinded by the science that I
lose sight of the awe and I was like
[__] like that gave me the chills I was
like that is so true and that like so I
love Sam and Jordan I think they're both
extraordinary minds but your notion of
being able to camp Indy camp I think is
so important the ability to bounce back
and forth talk a little bit about that
and how you see that playing out today
in particular where people are camping
but nobody's D camping well it's very
interesting people sometimes accuse me
of having it both ways or
middle-of-the-road and nothing could be
further from the truth people get
annoyed with that well they have the
idea that you're you know pick a side
man why well because it's pure because
there's mush in the middle for the from
their perspective and what I view is Wow
you imagine that these two sides have
been warring let's say for thousands of
years or hundreds of years or even
decades and it's not because both you
know both sides probably have a point
it's just not there's no synthesis of
that dialectic so you have these these
sides and yelling at each other and I
always think if two sides have been
yelling at each other with smart people
on both sides for a long time that's my
cue that they're not they haven't found
a frame outside of flatland they're
trapped they have not found the portal
and so what I start doing is I invite
them both into my mind initially in a
sandbox you know can I represent the
other person's argument so they would
say yeah man that's exactly what I'm
saying
all right can I do that for both sides
or their multiple sides beyond - and so
once you sort of have all of these
things playing your head then you start
saying okay I'm going to make an
outreach from one sound sandbox to the
other what if I'm convinced that there
is no god but the religion is super
valuable what does that feel like
or I'm convinced that there's absolutely
a god but that it leads us into madness
with people making claims that can't be
substantiated and we have to revere them
right whatever these things are so once
you start doing that that's why for
example years ago on the Tim Ferriss
program
about using coprolalia you just using a
string of swear words to let your brain
we're not in Kansas anymore this is not
safe space we're working blue it's after
hours it's time to get creative it's
time to get violent
and you have to be decent about it
that's like you know comedians if you go
to a you know I was just catching a set
at the comedy club at the Comedy Store
and that's pretty pretty brutal but on
the other hand it's happening in a room
everybody's there voluntarily and in
general you know it there's a limit to
how bad it's gonna get and so these kind
of rough spaces that aren't safe spaces
are important if we're going to be
generative and you know my belief is is
that we all have to recognize that the
pure States are to be avoided or rather
that you have to embrace multiple pure
States because purity of one particular
kind or another is where madness comes
from we have to not we have to welcome
the infection and as you were talking
like I was getting the chills that to me
that notion of being and what you're
calling the sandbox of being able to
steal man the argument was it your
brother that came up with that phrase or
did he just bring it to the and I think
I brought it to the wider world but it
came out of the sort of East Bay
rationality community at least that's
where I found it so I love the the
concept of steel Manning I think that's
so important of I think ideologically
people have to believe it is their
obligation to steal man somebody instead
of trying to tear them down like to
first understand right and I say that
selfishly like one of the things I don't
understand is when you and I think this
is what you mean when you say that the
madness happens in the purity I think
more from a biological perspective that
once the crop is completely homogeneous
it is [__] at risk like one thing
goes wrong and the entire crop is lost
right one well even worse imagine
somebody who's eukaryotic decides that
they're in fact infected with their own
mitochondria I you know then the thing
that's powering every cell in your body
which was initially probably a procurer
a confection hmm and become something
you need to rid yourself of okay well in
the process you're gonna just you know
you're gonna go totally OCD it's like
somebody told you hey there's a quarter
in your new leather couch go get it you
know and there's no quarter there and
you're just gonna rip the thing to
shreds yeah so getting people to as a
selfish driver to put themselves in a
position with a constant trying to
understand what the other person is
coming from so that they can adopt
anything that works right so Bruce Lee
said take what works discard what
doesn't add your own so having that
anybody whose primary goal is
self-development and yes we have the
guitar anybody whose primary goal is
self-development I think has to have as
a part of their operating system a
desire to first listen hear what might
be usable even if you think that that's
a rival camp take on what works discard
what doesn't and then find a way to
leverage that so that you can do things
in the world and my obsession is getting
people to understand and this is one of
my portals and this was the path I was
going down earlier the reason that I'm
so interested in this particular portal
that I'm an outline is it will change
your life forever so it's on one side of
the portal you think that you are made a
certain way and that is that and life is
about making the most of the gifts you
were given or weren't or you know making
the most of a bad situation however you
want to look at it on the other side of
that violent act of creation of stepping
through that portal of being kicked
through or whatever yeah you realize
that you can change your perception and
the perception will change your beliefs
which will change your behaviors which
will change your outcome and the outcome
of course is where I'm obsessed so the
portal I'm trying to cram people through
who is realizing that oh I'm viewing the
world from a fixed mindset to use Carol
Dweck's famous book mindset and I can
have a growth mindset so and one I
believe my talent intelligence are fixed
rates and the other I believe they're
malleable traits and once I believe
they're malleable traits then I can get
into my grand obsession which is getting
people to understand that skills have
utility so since we have a guitar here
this may be the perfect explanation that
guitar that
very guitar that you're about to pull
out has gotten me laid many times now
that's a real outcome because I wrote
songs for my then girlfriend and she was
moved by it it was it was a full
recognition of her psychology and what
made her feel good and and made us feel
connected and made her feel sexual and
because I could make her feel sexual
then I got to have the experience that I
wanted to have and also I wanted to
connect and I wanted to convey something
to her and I wanted to create the shared
lexicon you were talking about you know
we could adopt the Indian Canon or the
East Asian kin whatever the can like we
were building a Canon together and it
was like you to be able to reference a
song that I had written for I mean it
just like it began to shape our lives
together but that started with my dumb
ass having to learn how to play a G
chord a C chord a D chord right but
those skills have utility they let me do
something and so the thing that freaks
me the [__] out about people and leaning
back nest about haha about people that
they get lost in what you call the
purity they're they're stuck in their
idea they're not looking to steal man
the other argument they just want to
know how their right is skills have
[__] utility like if you learn
something from that person you're going
to be able to do something with that
thing right there is based on an
impurity the guitar which is
even-tempered
you gonna break it out while you explain
it'll probably pick it up barely I'll
narrate for anybody at home who's
watching and he will pick back up where
he left off I is pulling out the guitar
and we're going to learn how the guitar
itself is born of impurity I'm excited
to hear the answer this I'm not sure
that I can predict it I think there
might be one more than you would imagine
that thing always surprised me with just
how many latches it has helped out there
we go there it is
all right like I said I make no promises
about the tuning well even if we have
just one string we can probably figure
out something all right so first what's
the impurity this is based on well so if
you break the string into three pieces
so this would be your E string but if I
place my finger exactly at the midpoint
it will double the frequency and if I
place it a third of the way through it
should be giving me three times the
frequency now that number of three times
the frequency is not actually the
even-tempered version of three times the
frequency what do you mean even-tempered
well we have 12 frets in an octave okay
those have been specifically geared by
the person who made the guitar to break
that 12 break that octave which is a
doubling of the frequency into 12
exactly equal steps okay if you do 12
exactly equal steps then you will never
reach exactly three times the frequency
as you go up an octave which is 12 and
then seven more half steps which is 19
steps in total that's as close as you
can get so it's the difference between
and that sounds almost the same but
there's actually a tiny discrepancy and
that's why we choose the number 12
because only for 12 do we get that tiny
discrepancy and have a reasonable number
of steps in the octave the equation if
you're trying at home is 2 to the 19
twelfths is almost equal to 3 that is
slightly below okay that help you ready
monkey I'm telling okay that impurity is
the basis for Western harmony that's the
great thing that the West did that
nobody else because without that what
would happen without that you just have
the pure
[Music]
so for example I couldn't harmonize with
that it seems like I could well if you
had those as the exact steps you'd
notice that you couldn't switch keys
you couldn't modulate two other keys
very easily so you've taken a there's a
crime in our fret board and you've taken
the body and you've chopped it up into
12 equal pieces and that disguises the
fact that our third and that our fifth
in even temperament and our fifth in
physics which is the Pythagorean fifth
are not the same note but they're so
close that our ear can't tell the
difference I wasn't sure what I was
gonna do at this moment in the podcast I
knew it would come where you're saying a
whole lot of words and I don't
understand how they add up I understand
each individual word but strung together
in the way that you're stringing them
together I can only nod and smile is
there another way to explain this
because I hear that here was my
hypothesis with music that you
understand math so well that to you it
is self-evident that a guitar is math
and to me it is not and I experienced
the guitar entirely experientially so
whatever portal exists between the
experience of music and the math of
music I desperately want to cram myself
through because I think it'd be [__]
amazing to understand that - I don't
know I don't want to understand it I
want to feel it I want two hundred I
want to understand at a body level okay
and I don't know if my mind is I don't
like to have a fixed mindset so I'm very
open to I just haven't had the key
insight that's going to invite me
through the portal but it feels like the
thing I don't understand is math and
that there is a key insight to be had in
math that until I have that key inside a
math your sentences will continue to
sound cool like when you talk it almost
sounds like poetry but I don't
understand it okay well the first thing
you have to know is that there are
certain things that are encoded in
physics okay that sound to us as if they
were are composed or like music and if I
understand them they're gonna be playing
the guitar easier because I want people
to understand what the punch line is if
we fight when I figure I'm gonna just
play harmonics that would occur if we
strung a catgut between two trees
in Borneo okay okay do you recognize
that yes I couldn't tell you what it is
if he's played it again it's imprinted
the lick from pretty woman oh then
definitely not like by Rory or be
walking back to me
so those notes are encoded into the
vibrating into the Fourier series of the
vibrating string okay so the point was
that I don't think that whoever wrote
that song that Roy Orbison made famous I
don't think that song is composed so
much is discovered it really just came
out of expanding a series of vibrations
for the wave equation of the of the
vibrating string but because of because
of that right there's certain things
that people will say our cultural like
right so Oh Eve home from The Wizard of
Oz or wise men's right that alternation
has to do with the natural modes of a
vibrating string so all of our all over
the world people here Oh Eve ooh as a
natural tone right okay that's just it
just has to do with the fact that your
vote your vocal chords or any one
dimensional medium like a flute or a
string is going to have those things as
part of it why does that matter like -
yeah average person unless this is going
to help me get laid right skills have
utility unless this is gonna boil down
to something that I can functionally get
something that I want to do that so
let's let's take the coffee you seem
disappointed well no is it is it that
the math of this is fascinating and
beautiful to you are we like in that
moment where I want the science you want
the awe you want something I want to
give you whatever it is that you want
and then I want you baby
so for example if I take the second
third and fourth string and I play those
that is a major chord if the guitar is
tuned to standard tuning okay right now
I'm gonna ignore the two strings closest
to my head and the one closest to the
floor right and I have the coffee mug so
assume that somebody has a guitar around
the house and since the Ender tuning so
now I go now I don't have to learn how
to fret a G chord or a C chord or all
the things that hurt my hand I'm just I
got my claw around like a mud so I can
start immediately playing songs or I'll
admit that was [__] cool okay the
next thing is is is that because the
hard [__] just for people listening
forgive us since you can't see what's
going on but the the part of learning
the guitar that is infinitely harder is
the fretting like using your fingers
which hurts in the beginning and you're
probably gonna bleed and you have to
build these insane calluses and yeah I I
went to my guitar teacher and I said you
know what I'm I just don't think my
hands are built for this because I could
not do a barre chord to save my life so
to see you use a mug that effectively is
right so I'm throwing away most of the
guitar half of the guitar strings one
five and six and now I this is gonna be
like a really bad version of the four
chord song but go to youtube put in the
four chord song look at the axis of
awesome with all of their songs so
here's the here's the key thing in the
four chord song
three of the four chords are just
strings two three and five with the mug
at different positions along the
fretboard twelve seven and five these
frets okay the only thing that you have
to throw in is that there's a minor
chord which just strings one two and
three placed played at the twelfth fret
position now this will be a lousy
version of the four chord sign but the
key point is if it comes to you in under
two minutes that you can now play all of
the song
in the 4 chord song badly with a coffee
mug and a guitar that somebody else to
then you're through a portal so for
example if you think
let's try beast of burden which isn't
it's gonna be of the wrong voicings so
the musicians will object to it so and
I'll never be a beast of burden now
that's not a great version of the song
but for two minutes and you think
there's no hopeless it's not too bad
we're talking about my kinds occur right
yep
this genius musician everybody thinks is
an amazing guy what's even better about
him is that he's a very generous teacher
his good friend who's very kind he'll
did you meet him the network man as soon
as you break out you meet all these
amazing people and I followed the rules
I didn't meet anybody that's interesting
that that's a conversation worth having
but finish his thought and so the
thought I was gonna have is is that if
you think about that song that he wrote
for more or less for Avicii that took
over the world I realize he wrote a song
for VG didn't he do this um wake me up
when it's all over
maybe I've no idea yeah so it's like
it's the same four chords but he starts
from the minor chord in the in the cycle
so if you put them around its like six
minor so feeling my way through the
darkness it's that cycle now my point is
that those are things that once you
learn the coffee mug trick mm-hmm you
think okay I completely miss assess how
difficult this was now was the coffee
mug trick is that the portal or did you
come to realize everything that you just
said from first music and I couldn't
understand what was being said to me
when people tried to teach me music the
standard way so I had to find my own way
and you say you couldn't understand it
what do you mean actually I want to go
back to your learning disabilites sure
what what were they how did you build
confidence in yourself could you tell
I'm [__] smart man there's just some
translation error
was recognized for being decent as a
student to begin with okay and what
happened was that that recognition
translated to my being skipped a grade
even though I was already young for my
grade so I was like fairly advanced
relative to the American system you know
other people skip two three four grades
this was just one grade but to then have
my handwriting and a lot of these sort
of executive functioning issues take
over you know like no matter how
beautiful a poem I could write I would
always be graded on punctuation and so
it was just this precipitous fall from
educational grace and that having had a
memory like the only remnant of my being
have having been a good student was that
I was somehow weirdly young for this
grade given that I was screwing up
everything and I was at a really good
school which was hard to get into be
that I had gotten into before the
superpower had fallen away and so there
was just this like weird memory and of
course in all the Cinderella stories
right Cinderella's never really of lowly
birth she's always you know got
something special so that was my little
something special and then when I found
that I couldn't do music and I couldn't
do math because you had to rely so much
on calculation and that required writing
things down and being very careful about
it everything melted away and I just
became convinced that I wouldn't be
fenced out of anything that I was just
gonna be so aggressive that I was going
to eat the system that was trying to eat
me and I made education the enemy
because that's what they were they
didn't realize it necessarily but all
these people who prided themselves on
being educators were just being
incredibly abusive to me year after year
just tearing me to shreds because it was
necessary for their fiction that the
good students were getting ahead and the
bad students were not putting in enough
work or didn't have a gift and you know
when I found out this is on high school
at this point I even through college I
mean I was determined
I figured I was gonna drop out of
college there was a language requirement
I took French I was getting nowhere like
you were having a hard time learning it
an impossible time learning because it
wouldn't stick because the number of
things I could not figure out from the
Spelling's the accents the
irregularities why is everything
gendered were you frustrated with the
nature of the language because like so
I'm I've heard you talk many many times
and dude your ability to logic through
something is is really but that's why
I'm saying Indonesian is special because
Indonesian removes a lot of Road I'm
even saying like logic your way through
like the following hey I want to get a
degree it'll be useful to me I'm also by
the way I've already done the whole
[__] degree except for the language
saying so I'm just gonna brute-force
memorized I was gonna do worse I was I
was going I don't think anything anyone
needs a BA to get a higher degree so it
was part of it just the anger of the
school system is the enemy and so [__]
these kids I'm not gonna get a degree if
they're gonna make me do something that
I think is dumb well I I I think that
there's an aspect to that which is self
protective emotionally this is that is
also motivating can you imagine that
you're gonna go up against the entire
system and win and you start envisioning
your victory over a system that does not
want you at the table yes I mean just
try to try to imagine like being the
blackest person possible at a KKK
meeting and getting everybody singing
your praises by the end that's that's
your goal right you're just gonna you
were going to inflict yourself upon the
world and that that was necessary to
build strength of character because when
I you know I got to Harvard in
mathematics there was no one remotely
like me you know in their approach to
this everybody broke competitions these
were like the winners of the company it
was like a tournament and people kept
winning and so they kept advancing and
in every one snow I think you know I
found out that yo-yo ma didn't win any
competitions when he was young and that
was really distinguished because in
general the way you got to be it you
Yama's level was through a tournament
model and so what happened with me is I
went to like the Museum of Science and
Industry and I thought wow this is so
cool I want to figure out how to become
a scientist or a mathematician or an
engineer or something like that and then
when I found out that you had to be
really good at it I just thought well
that's unfair no literally like if the
if the universe is written in
differential geometry what are the odds
that I'm not going to learn the language
in which the cosmos was written there's
just no way you're gonna fence me out of
it so I [__] love that mentality so
much you can't well but it people don't
like it
I think that what you have to understand
is is that like I'm sure that when I was
singing there musicians that are
cringing you know or they've got their
hands over their ears I'm like you
wanted to hear where do you really hear
this difference between even temperament
and the Pythagorean temperament you know
you hear it in the blue third so the
difference between like like that
is the place in which the maximum
difference occurs that our third is
wildly off and so when I want to teach
people about music I've got this problem
always which is I've got this these very
exceptionally good people who say you
know you're teaching people wrong you're
giving them the wrong ideas this isn't
helpful and I have to say screw you to
all the people whose playing I know is
better than mine and whose stuff I love
but I'm not I'm not talking to the
people that they're going to reach I'm
talking about the people who are gonna
die never having a relationship with
music and this coffee mug may rescue
some of them so that they will become
the students of those great musicians
but what I'm interested is I'm
interested in the losers I'm interested
in everyone who got left behind you know
if I had a gang sign it would be an L in
the middle of my forehead if I ever make
it to the Tonight Show I want them to
play me on with baby even the losers get
lucky sometimes it's just this idea of I
will not be fenced out because of your
hang-ups as an educator there's no way
I'm going
except the D or the F or the you know
Johnny can try better or you know arena
needs to turn in our homework more
regularly no you're wrong those kids are
not failing for the reasons you think
they don't think failing because you
think they don't care they do care they
don't know how to do the things that
come naturally to the kids you're
calling the a students and so I'm
interested give me your F students give
me the kids with the bad attitudes give
me the kids with the learning
disabilities you want to put in the
corner and you want to hold back because
mostly you've miss assess those people
maybe I think 15 to 20 percent of our
country is filled with unbelievable
learners who were being held back by
educators and nobody wants to take to
the educators those kids are with me and
you've got to get away from them because
you're doing incalculable harm and by
the way any parent who's listening to
this who's got a kid who's not living up
to potential is sitting there getting
closer and closer to speaker what did he
just say and if I say these are gifts
they're not they're not disabilities do
not over medicate your children embrace
entirely different ways of educating
your kids they can learn anything what I
want to know how it's a gift and two are
there actually places right now that
people can go that specialize and
educating people like that well I think
there's something called the summit
Center in in Walnut Creek in the East
Bay there's a book called the dyslexic
advantage I think there's something
called the bridges Academy in LA but
there's an entire you know what I found
was is that there's a group of kids who
meet in Golden Gate Park in San
Francisco to do LARPing and I didn't
know anything about LARPing and the moms
sit around bitching about the schools
that their kids didn't get into and say
you know you know my son Arun is an
amazing computer programmer he started
his first business but we can't get into
the swanky private schools because they
took one look at him and they don't want
him and I'm thinking like yeah they
don't want him but all we have to do is
to make sure that this kid doesn't
develop some so
wrong idea about his his gifts and we
have to inflict our best people on the
system because the system doesn't want
our best people your beef with the
system I find particularly interesting
there's something about your imagined
God let's see if I can recapture the
words you used imagine taking on the
whole system knowing you're gonna win
it's not quite right but that was
certainly the sentiment and that is that
puts you in a rarefied group most people
are they're really broken by nobody
believing in them and I always tell
people the the biggest gift anyone can
ever give you and it will never feel
like a gift but the biggest gift anyone
can give you is doubt the problem is it
breaks most of the people that it
touches so I liken it to the inner
cities the inner cities break virtually
everybody that go through it but the
people that survive it come out the
other side these extraordinarily driven
unbreakable people and it's it's pretty
extraordinary when you see it happen but
how do we begin to get those people into
a position where they can and maybe it's
reading the books that you listed or
going to the places but I'm super
curious if you know like what is it
about their method that they're teaching
or maybe more easily what did you
realize what was the portal that you
went through that allowed you to
recognize your own struggles as an
actual gift or was it just that it
pissed you off enough that it made you
fight well for example like the first
portal for me really was music and it
was specifically the Blues which it is
for many people the Blues is some of the
most emotional music many people in my
day didn't even know that it was a
codified art form in large measure but
there was a 12 bar pattern it was a
formula so there was sort of on a piano
be your left hand secret which would be
the progression your right hand secret
would be the scale that nobody taught
you right it's not the major scale and
it ain't the minor scale and if you
think about I always do this as
descending scales the major scale
descending is joy two three
world the Lord has come but the blue
scale descending sounds like the
beginning to a song called messin with
the kid dee dee dee dee dee dee dee dee
dee and once you learn that scale you
realize how much of the stuff that you
loved was not in either the major or the
minor and you learn about these blues
blue notes you learn about seventh
chords and you learn about how to put
some grit and distortion in your guitar
I've got an amp and it's an alternate
world so the the portal in music that
was a big breakthrough for you in terms
of blues anyway was that there are these
left hand right hand secrets in a very
simple scale that once you learn that
you've sort of got I mean maybe 80
percent isn't the real number but it's
like some big percent you can vary with
a 4-quart song for example there because
you realize how many songs you love are
actually only four chords right and then
there was this weird Vivaldi piece which
is classical you know unapproachable
classical music that went something like
I'm I haven't played it forever so I
don't know if I remember
[Music]
and I thought that wasn't perfect it's
super rusty but wait a minute I can play
that almost instantaneously I don't need
to wait maybe my technique is gonna suck
maybe I'm never gonna make it to the
Carnegie Hall stage I don't care that
song is beautiful and it makes me feel
good and there's no one who can fence me
on it I have my grandfather that Brett
and I both talked about to thank me for
because he gave me this guitar and my
mom was dead set against it she said you
give him that guitar he's just gonna
give him an inferiority complex my
grandfather so I all he needs to do is
tune it if he can learn how to tune it
he never has to play it and he was such
he was such a genius that he figured out
how to get this thing into my life and I
tuned it and then after you tuning you
say well I wonder if it's good for
anything right and then you start
finding all of these techniques and
hacks and the craft behind it and you
realize you're behind the radio it's
like when you program a computer you're
on the other side of the screen that the
person is just using the apps is sitting
you know they're sitting in front of a
half-silvered mirror and you're looking
at them like you're the FBI and they're
just sitting there
you know typing away they don't even
know that their computer is a computer
they can't find the place where you
program the computer because now it's
hidden so there's just this entire
hidden world of everything like when you
learn a language why don't you learn
linguistics along with the language that
tells you why you know what is word
production and and morphology and
orthography and what's the evolution of
these things you know nobody tells you
there's a book called the Cambridge
encyclopedia of language or the loom of
language and that these books are like
Scrolls they have all this extra
information that people think well we
can't bother the students with it are
you kidding me that's that's the sugar
for people like me I'm gonna get in
behind that I'm gonna hack the hell out
of it I wonder though so when I think
about and in fact maybe I can give you
insight into what it is like to be I'm
guessing one of those teachers
the shortcuts and things that you're
talking about the portals the ability to
sort of understand the rules of the game
would you say that that's a fair way to
say that rules of the game that once
people understand that there are a
computer is coded it's not this mythical
box that there was a prompt line
somewhere that you can go in and once
you understand the rules and you can
begin to edit the code and so on and so
forth but you have to really understand
how it works is that fair I don't know
where you're going with it but I'll play
with that okay so if that's roughly fair
and trust me this isn't a trap but I'm
thinking so because what the the
perspective I want to give you is
somebody who has has come to embrace
that realization as fervently as you but
far slower and with less like being hit
with the AH and the wonder of like
having this breakthrough moment with a
guitar or whatever so I'm guessing the
place the teachers are coming from is
they don't get that same like big aha
moment it doesn't feel like a violent
stumbling through a portal what it feels
like is an insecurity trigger of this is
another thing that I have to learn and
understand and be able to convey and
teach to people and I think it speaks to
when I think about the education system
and mad love to everybody that's out
there teaching because I used to teach
it is [__] brutally difficult it is a
time suck of all time sucks
it is it will it will test your limits
as as an intellect quite frankly and
certainly as a leader of minions
especially if you have you know students
at an age where they can properly rebel
so it certainly isn't easy but it when
you're in there trying to make it happen
and you're realizing like this is
intimidating and it's scary to try to
put these lessons together I went
through school I use sort of brute force
I was good at learning they probably did
reasonably well in school which is why
they continued they got decent grades
they know how to play that game and so
their entire life is about I've gotten
good at this very finite thing and
people want to protect that sense of ego
and if their ego isn't that of being the
learner it's deeply more troublingly
that of being the teacher that one who
knows
in a sec how many students do you get
you have the right like look I'm so you
and I you and I who I don't know if we
see this exactly the same and you are
you have a righteous indignation that I
find intoxicating but I don't have okay
and so I heard Sam Harris talk about
this one time he said maybe something
broke in my brain when I was meditating
and I so I don't get this anger and
remember I was telling you before we
started rolling people love it when I
get like enraged about something but the
only things I can get enraged about are
things that I was doing myself in my own
opinions about me no there's an addict
there's an adaptive aspect to my voice I
am I am a where frustration you mean the
aggression they're cameras rolling and I
now have a platform and I have the
ability to go back and save myself
so that's who you're talking to I'm
talking to the parents who are gonna
take their kid anything I say where is
your algebra homework you forgot it at
school again you torren a ripped piece
of paper did you not read the directions
did where are your notes you know I
didn't know that I have this issue
called kinesthetic reinforcement that
when I take notes instead of
strengthening the pathway in the mind
it's so difficult for me to write that
it erases whatever notes I'm taking so I
wiped out the fancy private school
education by taking the notes that were
illegible and I didn't remember what was
going on in class and I only found this
out when I was in graduate school at
Harvard by the most precarious
circumstances possibly my view is is
that my PhD belongs to every learning
disabled family in the country because
so so far as I'm concerned the
difficulty of getting through the system
and surviving it is is that you're
constantly causing a problem for every
educator and so I am compassionate with
the problem right up to a particular
point and that is the point where you
say you know what I don't have time for
this [__] and I'm sorry but you're
getting a C and I some something in me
knows that I'm doing you wrong but I'm
not allowed to do you right I can't
figure out
I am allowed to give you an A in this
class because you turned in some other
project that I was not expecting because
you showed brilliance you showed
something else and somehow because of my
needs for my job I have to give you and
your family the bad news that you're
taking it for the team
and so my righteous indignation is
intended to start a blaze if there was
one thing I would love to do is to
liberate the families that are going
through this nightmare of looking at
their kids and saying wow you're really
just you're not getting it don't worry
there'll be something in life for you
like why are you giving up on your kids
if those kids are smart like this race
and IQ thing I cannot stand this race
and IQ thing I understand the idea that
IQ is somewhat predictive I understand
that you can correlate it with various
things iq is such a crude measure of all
of the things that we really deeply care
about and I can't help you know my
friend Nassim Taleb is brutal on this
topic he is not a nice person when it
comes to this issue but my energy is
with him how many people are we gonna
throw in the dummy pile you know I think
about Louis Armstrong a lot and I think
about Louis Armstrong and the fact that
we white Americans remember him as a
novelty singer like Hello Dolly and
that's not what he is he is that he is
the singular genius who wrote our
national classical music and he invented
it for my money modern jazz as we
understand it more or less
single-handedly is an orphan out of New
Orleans now we can't acknowledge his
genius we can't acknowledge that this is
an actual straight-up American genius
like none other
I mean like I don't know maybe Art Tatum
and Charlie Parker and a tiny number of
people who are just completely out there
but we are so wrapped up in this
nonsense about what makes
a good student and what makes a
first-class mind we don't see like let
me just give the simplest one that I
give a lot people call me colorblind and
I say oh do you feel bad because your
contrast blind and they say what I said
well I don't think you see contrast as
well so if we ever need to depend on
camouflage and spotting the enemy you're
gonna really need me around that's why
my trait is retained in the gene pool
and I understand that color is something
that gives you an advantage a lot of the
time but don't think that we couldn't
have driven my colorblindness out of the
system if it didn't confer an advantage
and you don't have that advantage and
you don't even know that you don't have
that advantage well the same thing is
true for most learning disabilities the
learning disability portion of the gift
is the price paid and you're not letting
me use the other part like I understand
the de Bugatti is pretty noisy and at
guzzles gas but it does go rather fast
if you know how to drive it and you're
telling me that I have to drive it in a
school zone for 25 miles an hour and
that it has to be under a certain
decibel level and that it can't guzzle
gas because it's too expensive and bad
for the environment screw you
I want those learning disabled kids
racing around the track at 300 miles an
hour and now you try to catch them this
is a this is an epidemic
mischaracterization of a giant portion
of the population from whom you will get
vaccines and new industries these are
the people who will write your scripts
that you'll be riveted must see TV from
the future and right now what you're
telling them is that they're a bunch of
morons so yeah there's a little bit of
righteous indignation oh man I love it I
think that I mean it's interesting so
not having lived through that not having
had that as my challenge is something
that I will say that I've just never
really thought a lot about the way that
people learn differently but you hear
stories like you making it all the way
to Harvard getting a degree in
mathematics and yet also being learning
disabled you hear people talk about how
Einstein when he was young people
supposedly told him that he wasn't that
bright and you know you you hear enough
stories like that and you started to
think okay maybe there are some people
that are just so far outside of the box
your Bugatti analogy I think is is
really spot-on that's uh yeah was a
great thing about it is that all those
learning disabled kids really appreciate
their Kara straight-a friends because
that you know you guys helped us out of
our jams you let us crib notes you very
often got us through school and don't
look at me I was a kid cheating all
right like a fiend alright
but what I'm trying to get at is I don't
see the learning disabled students
wanting to extinguish neurotypical I see
the neurotypical neurotypical freaked
out of their minds that the kid who they
think should be you know in the dummy
pile might have some super talents and
if you think about a lot of the energy
in Silicon Valley a friend of mine said
something which I thought was very wise
and she said if only we could harness
the energy of the billionaire's who
aren't still trying to prove to their
middle school cafeteria table that they
belong with the world that's pretty good
you know what's interesting and I think
I heard you talk about this once before
what this needs is it needs a word like
if people had a word you hear
learning-disabled and you think I mean
to be harsh you think that they're low
IQ you think that they're not bright
that they're going to struggle their
whole lives and you definitely hear I've
had a few of them on the show who've
been like yo I was in the short bus
classes and and you know my wife
struggled a little bit with that and
people didn't think she was very bright
but this chick is just a she's whip it
smart and B she is ungodly talented from
an arts standpoint just ridiculous but
always got made fun of because she was a
little bit dyslexic and just so it was
like a real struggle for her it needs a
name it needs a name where it's like cuz
cuz what part of what people are
struggling with is they don't know how
to think of it they don't know what to
do with it the system isn't wired for it
they're [__] swamped they've got a
kid at home who's you know getting in
trouble and trying drugs for the first
time we're having sex yeah [__] I don't
know what to do with this kid like he's
he's [__] Bugattis making all the
noise he's turning in the crumpled paper
which seems like willful decide
what's wrong with you we watch serious
as a comic I'm that's what I'm trying to
[__] rat that's what I'm trying to
get at our entire culture already knows
this do you want to hang with the x-men
or do you wanna hang with the muggles
you know I mean it doesn't matter it's
the same story over and over again mix
and match and I did there's some notion
right that the mutants are cool because
we all recognize our own mutations I
love giving the example of Elizabeth
Taylor with her two rows of eyelashes
because she was a mutant she had two
rows well yeah she was pretty hot
interesting right and the mutation
helped make her hot so once you start to
understand like you know I joke with
everybody that the motto of my family is
you can have my learning disabilities
when you pry them from my cold dead
fingers
because I want to make that cool you
already have a word it's like you it's
like queer as an epithet yeah okay I'll
take that and you want to say I'm low IQ
okay what is it gonna feel like to get
beat by somebody with low IQ do you sure
you want to choose that do you really
want to put processing as one of the
four categories of inputs to an
intelligence quotient your call I mean I
think that the point is we have to turn
this into a really fun bloodsport you
had me at blood sport yeah you see
because what we need is we need people
when I asked you know there's a version
of this that also works for women
there's a version of this that works for
african-americans because there are
different thought processes that have
huge advantages and what I believe is
that we can lie about us all being the
same or we can recognize that our gifts
lie in different places and I don't know
of I mean the gene pool seems to retain
a lot of things that people claim our
errors I'm pretty sure that those things
would be driven to frequency zero if
that's what they were dude have you read
the book a billion wicked thoughts no oh
my huh
what is that I've got a treat for you
all right so it
is a book I think written in 2011 by I
think they were former Google engineers
anyway they were very savvy on search
and they said hey the problem with sex
research is that there's ethics boards
that like are convinced you're doing it
for the wrong reasons so nobody's ever
really done this people put you under a
microscope they wonder what's wrong with
you it can be career suicide so nobody's
looked at sex then they thought well
wait a second the Internet is the
world's largest experience experiment of
what people are actually desiring not
what they say they desire because if you
put somebody into an environment and say
hey we're gonna keep these anonymous
don't worry right people still lie they
said but if you look for what they
search it tells you everything you need
to know dude
that book is [__] amazing and it
makes it so clear like I read it as a
writer as somebody who wants to write
better characters okay and not wanting
to write men who think like women or
women who think like men I want to write
like I I don't need to stay in the the
purity of the archetype I like what
you're talking about the tension but
it's like if you don't understand the
archetype if you don't understand like
that sort of this is a hyper male brain
this is a hyper female brain and now I
can nuance off of that into real
characters who were far more diverse and
heterogeneous and all that but anyway I
like to know where at write the
breakdown of what people search for
pornographically what they pay for
pornographically was beyond [__]
enlightening give me three takeaways
amazing takeaway number one it's when
you compare back-to-back descriptions in
erotica written by women and basically
smut is probably a better name written
by men so words only descriptions of
sexual acts the women it's like he drew
near to me with a steely gaze he pressed
against my body he was engorged okay and
that's pretty [__] close to direct
quote and then you have the guys he
grabbed her and anybody with kids right
now would be the time to hit pause if
there are children around but it's like
you know he grabbed her ass cheeks and
like just
I mean I'll stop myself there but in the
book they [__] read the next like six
lines which are just ridiculously
pornographic
about the body parts so you've got women
talking about the relationship to bodies
it's not description of parts and then
you have guys obsessed with things parts
anatomy and like it is hysterical seeing
them read back-to-back number two when
you have female porn essentially the
female porn genre is all relationship
based and it is in the in fact who would
you say is that this is gonna be ultra
controversial so I say this
tongue-in-cheek this is I'm quoting from
the book but who would you say is like
the biggest purveyor of essentially
female pornography though it doesn't
meet the typical criteria female
pornography I don't know you need to
give me more of a Stephenie Meyer the
author of Twilight that is basically it
is all romance
it's werewolves it's vampires it's all
about lust and desire and this triangle
of desirability where you have one woman
at the middle being desired by two men
and it's so fascinating to hear their
breakdown of how like that is the swirl
of what women are really drawn to and
then you've got men that are doing your
classic pornographic search and it's all
about you know God men search for butts
breasts and feet those are like the
three big ones and they go into detail
about why that is and I was like [__]
this is so interesting to hear like how
different the two takes on on sexuality
are and then you're getting sort of into
the base desire now what makes the book
so [__] interesting is they explain
why it happens so with women where the
cost of sex is child rearing which is
nine months potential death and then
years of having to take care of the
child
it is extremely labor intensive it is
extremely calorically intensive time
attention all of it guys exact opposite
you can the cost of sex is very low you
can abandon the child if you want so you
have this super unequal distribution so
you have women in the book they called
it a detective agency the female psyche
is a detective agency try
to figure out if you're a male that's
gonna stay around help protect a child
rear it that is incredibly important so
they put them through the psychological
wringer before they decide whether
they're gonna have sex or not whereas
guys its cues basically of fertility so
you're looking for youth and you're
looking for a certain distribution of a
certain type of fat which is largely
associated with youth and fertility and
then with feet it comes down to oddly
enough
estrogen which is a sign of fertility
tells feet to stop growing which I
didn't know but so women with I guess
ideal levels of estrogen tend to have
shorter feet which is why there are
cultures that practise foot binding
because small feet and women are a point
of attraction for men who over millennia
been sharpened to find women to have
these signs of fertility [__] crazy
so you put those two together and now
and clearly it is far more nuanced and
all of that I'm giving you like a real
thumbnail sketch but I found that so
[__] interesting in terms of what you
were talking about if don't pretend that
they're the same and don't pretend like
they don't have advantages like when you
really understand why a woman would need
to focus on relationships and
relationships with other women and being
able to get the information that she
needs about whether a partner is
valuable that finding ways to
short-circuit that so one of the easiest
ways to know if a man is worthy is
whether or not other women desire him
and so like that whole thing of like one
of the things that makes a guy
attractive is already being in a
relationship and so all of the the
interesting intersections of desire
arising out of another woman's desire
for somebody it's [__] fascinating so
it's interesting I I thought about why
not do evolutionarily aware porn like
allow very interesting allow the
greatest evolutionary theorists to write
the scripts no not kidding no no no I'm
actually it's funny because it would be
a fantastic and I believe that actually
it wouldn't work because we are so far
out of the EEA the environment of
evolutionary adaptiveness into this
thing which I call the EE and the
environment of evolutionary novelty that
with the amount of birth control in our
system I think that a lot of we don't
really understand
what the pill has done to female
eroticism I think that with a failed
economy it's changed what people desire
the number of women I find now talking
about preferring really exaggerated age
differences which is probably a proxy
for people who are willing to commit and
have the resources to raise a child is
changing some notion of attractiveness
Mariana donek treadmill where they're
cycling through porn at such a rate that
they're becoming really deviant and
things are not getting through to them
that would have once been considered
extremely exciting so then you know you
start to see these podcasts you know we
were just talking before about this show
call her daddy which is extremely kind
of ever heard in it's pretty raunchy man
it's not what you two women they're
funny they're playful but they're also
really over the edge and I think you
might you might learn something I did
because I was trying to understand
podcast demographics and somebody said
this has mostly a female listenership I
do think that a lot of things that
you're talking about about women taking
a cue as to who's desirable based on who
other women find attractive is pretty
highly conserved but I think we are now
somewhere so far east of eden that even
the evolutionary predictions of our
erotic differences are probably being
really challenged at the moment I don't
think it's as clean-cut as it used to be
that's interesting so one thing I'll say
to that though is one of the predictions
of course would be on the male side a
desire for novelty so some element of
that that would be a largely weighted
part of this would play into it now
whether they could predict exactly what
people would search for but some of the
stuff that popped up is like being
really high search for terms or websites
that have done well
pay standpoint or made the Alexa ranking
now keeping in mind this back in 2011 so
things may have changed but man it's
it's it is surprising if the answer were
anything other than novelty well I think
we're I think we're getting to the point
that normal porn has gotten really sick
that if you're not a prude about
eroticism some of the things that you're
seeing pushed have to do with the fact
that our brains are now habituated to
all sorts of things that you probably
would never have seen visually unless
you were like Genghis Khan right because
everything's on demand and so the search
for novelty I think is taking in some
cases quite a dark term even for people
who are pretty okay with the idea of
pornography and eroticism as being a an
important part of an adult diet for the
mind where we're worries me as kids for
sure and I may be even less worried
about today than I am in 15 years when
you have VR that is bordering on
photorealistic and that's when Photoshop
whoever you want in ya you know choose
your own experience that's very
disturbing but I'll be honest I'm more
concerned right now about people finding
partners to have children with I think
that this is a an economic epidemic that
we don't feel comfortable talking about
and people comfortable talking well
because for example if you have a fair
idea that you're at risk for not having
the family thing work out like it's
gotten a little late in the day and you
don't see a lot of prospects lined up
and you've had a few relationships that
haven't ended in commitment and
resources and children and the economy
doesn't seem to want to come up with a
30 year plan to fit a mortgage and
getting some kids through college I
think that the transition from the
previous world has been pretty brutal
and a lot of people don't want to say
yeah I really want to fan
if it doesn't work out I'm gonna be it's
gonna be a major hit to my life in my
sense of myself and we need you know in
part I think that a lot of us don't want
to see young women forced onto the apps
you know which seems like it turns life
into this ever had a ting perspective
like a sink it's just you know somebody
somebody said this is a singles bar in
my pocket and wherever I'm bored I just
go to the singles bar and start swiping
and I thought okay and how do you feel
about so well in the aggregate I feel
pretty terrible about it but I can't
stop and so you know you've commodified
all of this stuff and I don't think it's
a good deal for young women at all I
think that you know young women have
been used to putting men through their
paces and demanding a lot and you know
saying you know jump this high and
seeing who can clear the bar and when
that power is not present and when men
can't win these competitions and have
those competitions really mean something
we'd arranged as a society because
society is about continuity and
continuity is about babies so no matter
what you want to do you can take it away
from babies I remember I was talking to
a young woman who was like 26 or
something did you ask me if I had kids
and I said yes I said do you have kids
and she's like practically spit out her
beer like what I thought do you think
it's really the crazy question that I
would ask a 26 year old woman if she had
kids and then you know she thought about
it just feel felt very remote and this
is the economy that were bequeathing to
people and my belief is is that if the
median individual cannot count on being
able to you know have a home in a
reasonable city that has lots of jobs so
that if one job doesn't work they can
switch and one person can stay home
doesn't have to be the dad doesn't have
to be a mom and a dad can any pair but
you need somebody with the freedom to
stay home to raise children while
somebody else can be counted upon to go
be the breadwinner in an economy that
isn't you
no absolutely razor's edge this is nuts
and you know it's driven home to me
recently and my father turned 85 we were
at a party for his friends and some of
their closest friends lived in our
neighborhood when I was growing out
there saying oh yes you know when we
moved in all those years ago there were
14 boys who used to play on the street
and now there are not well and I said
what do you mean they're not just what
young families can't afford to live on
the street and I said do you have any
thought in your mind that that was a
catastrophe that happened to your street
and that maybe your generation had some
response but this is the Silent
Generation so before the baby had
something to do to say hey maybe this is
not good for society if young families
she said well these homes are perfect
for families and I said but you just
told me that there are no families on
your street so this is an epidemic and
this is deranging us and this is a lot
of what's behind this kind of sense of
injustice and people trying to find
groups I think to take care of because
you have got a lot of maternal instincts
that are not grounding in happy hopeful
homes raising kids that's really
interesting what do you think is the
sort of key driver is this student loans
is it
the average salary isn't going up like
and part of the what drives my question
is I know what I pay so my previous
company I had at one point 3,000
employees about 1,500 full-time and then
another 1,500 part-time here I have 20
plus employees full-time and then
another I don't know seven or eight
part-time and I know what I pay them and
it's a good wage it's a hell of a lot
more than I was making at their age
that's probably the easiest way to say
it okay so where is it that just the way
that we are and what we pay is not
indicative of what other companies pay
is it is it something else is just going
to be really kind of brutal
first of all we were in an orchard with
lots of low-hanging scientific fruit
where you could take the scientific
fruit and turn it into technology in
short order we're still making
scientific advances but most of those
that are even fairly profound are not
instantly convertible into technology so
there might be low-hanging fruit in a
new orchard but we haven't found the new
orchard so we're picking fruit that has
a very different characteristic so
that's the first part is that our
pipeline got screwed up how does that
really play out in like dollars and
cents well I'm thinking of this street
right it's the perfect analogy so you
have a street the houses have a price to
buy they have a price to rent so when I
think about okay what is stopping
somebody from either buying or renting
so if the prices are too high prices are
too high so then is it that the prices
are artificially too high because we
have a bunch of empty houses and people
who are buying as an investment well
they're just being stupid so you weren't
you you're fairly familiar with my
theories and acronyms and things so
you've probably heard about the embedded
growth obligation yeah you go but what I
had I and I get that and that scares me
and I totally buy into it what I don't
and for anybody listening and tell me if
I [__] this up but like basically we
have a system that's entirely predicated
on continued growth and that growth
slowed down starting the 70s or 80s and
we've done a lot of [__] shell games
to make it seem like we're growing and
the one that when you give I'm always
freak the [__] out by is the essentially
Ponzi scheme of Education yeah where
higher education you're teaching people
to be professors but there's only gonna
be so many professors or two law firms
only gonna be so many partners so it's
like every graph tells the same story so
but what I don't understand is if that's
been the same since the 70s like I
didn't even graduate high school until
the mid 90s and this has nothing ever
seen I mean look there were times I
couldn't quite pay my bills there were
times where you know I was sharing an
apartment with a bunch of people but
it's like it it never felt like the
system had broken in some impossible way
and this isn't me saying that it isn't
broken this is me just saying I want to
really understand okay like where we've
gone wrong also this
what I say to my friends in San
Francisco so they've got good jobs their
programmers they're having a blast
they're going to Tulum and you know
traveling to Bali and all these things
and so I say you're living in a group
house what do you think about buying
your own home and asking that gal you've
been going out with for a couple years
to get married and like the conversation
just gets really weird oh I'm not so
confident that I can commit to a 30-year
mortgage and you know prices are insane
and I'm not positive that she's the
right one for me and you know all these
things or if I talk to my female friends
they have a set of different stories
which is like I'm so tired of little
boys who never grow up
is this a psychological malaise like
because that explanation I can
understand we're not excited about low
variance futures needed for children as
we cuz we don't see things popping off
like this isn't Beijing in 2006 where
it's just like the sky is the limit or I
think people have a have a pretty strong
sense
well like I hired a millennial who I'm
very good friends with and I noticed
that he was like not that committed to
certain kinds of projects he worked hard
but he also had a very clear sense of
you know my obligation ends at this
point I said well know this person I
think they work here okay and I said
well why why why do we have a difference
in in a sense of work ethic and he said
oh because my generation watched your
generation get screwed by the baby
boomers and we're not falling for it do
you buy that yeah that sounds like
[__] to me and and when I say I am
happy to be convinced what I want is the
[__] truth dude all right cuz I have
no interest in the truth let's get to
the truth because so I have a psychotic
work ethic why because I didn't use to
and my entire life changed when I
changed my work ethic but you fit look
you're tense to me like you're talking
about founding companies I've done both
I've been in
employee and I founded company so I've
played both sides of the fence and how
did how did the employee well look I
don't want to over index I mean because
you know there are particular lawyers in
particular law firms who aren't founding
anything or doing just fine but it's a
minority position and what I believe is
is that we are in a situation in which
we are not excited by the future and the
people who are real stakeholders in the
system have in general been very focused
on making sure that the pyramid is
always supplied so this idea for example
if you have to go to college the debt
has to become non dischargeable in
bankruptcy we get to load up the
universities with administrators all
that kind of stuff and then of course
the main one which is really bizarre
which is there's the secret weapon and
the secret weapon is immigration and the
great part about immigration as a as a
invidious tool for one generation to
screw another generation with is is that
if you call it out there's only one
explanation for why you would fight
having other people added to the bottom
of a pyramid scheme which is you must be
a xenophobe
or probably a racist and the answer is
no I'm really just trying to choke your
supply of new virgins to add to this
pyramid scheme so that you can continue
to transfuse yourself yeah that's
interesting so let me see if I can steal
men as quickly I this is the one time in
my life where I am the one that has a
heart out in five minutes I'm so [__]
horrified this is so interesting to me
so I'll try to do it quickly okay so we
have a pyramid scheme in that there are
only so many jobs and I'll even abstract
it from being a lawyer which is very
easy to understand there's only so many
people make partner being a teacher it's
easy to understand you can only create
so many other teachers and obviously
we're talking at higher education and
I'll just say your normal job and I've
told my employees this like look every
step you go up you there's fewer
available positions until you get to the
CEO and there's only one so there's only
like
you can get promotion I've never thought
of there being sort of a money does not
strike me as the finite resource the
promotion strikes me as a finite
resource you can keep making more and
more money depending on the health of
the company and your contributions to it
so that's part of my bias is that when I
try to use just first principles I'm
like if this person is that valuable to
me I'm going to [__] pay them because
I have fear of loss I don't want to lose
them so which is why default to create
fear of loss in your employer if you
want more money but the company has to
be doing well so let me stick to the
Ponzi scheme here so very interesting
take on immigration so you have people
coming into the system they are willing
to work cheaper than the other people
would otherwise work in the system you
got to be careful about that but keep
going it's interesting I'm trying to
represent your position or no but what
I'm trying to say is it really the
biggest issue is push out the labor
supply curve you say that another one or
wage is your price yep and I bring
people from foreign country you can't
compete because they'll do it for cheap
you know it's not even that I mean maybe
the idea is that you're you're a
superior source of labor who's you
whoever you are you're the domestic
let's assume that you're a worker inside
of the US yep the big play in some sense
of the previous generations the Silent
Generation and more importantly the baby
boomers was internationalism which they
called globalization and the hidden part
of globalization that wasn't the United
Colors of Benetton was the idea if we
can just break our dependence on each
other and look abroad and talk tell a
beautiful story about what we're going
to do for Africa and Asia then the idea
is is that we can continue to grow our
slice of the pie even though the pie
might not be growing at the same rate
because from my perspective as a Silent
Generation or baby boomer I'm focused on
a slice not the pie and so there was a
huge amount of value gotten from
tricking people into thinking that
globalization was this beautiful Davos
inspired kind of philanthropy that was
going to be a rising tide to raise all
boats and those Americans who had rights
inside of our system and this goes for
Brits weds British rights and French
right French
whatever had a right that was valuable
which is I have asymmetric access to my
labour market and that's how we worked
as a nation so now you start the world's
greatest PR campaign which is patriotism
doesn't exist it's only nationalism and
of course nationalism is really ultra
nationalism which is jingoism which is a
precursor to Nazism so you start saying
you know I kind of believe in
citizenship and patriotism and now
you're telling me that that's I'm a bad
person and now you've got the Davos
crowd talking about Financial Inclusion
in Africa and Asia and you notice that
they're not really that interested in
Michigan or Alabama and it's a it's an
enemy why they're not because I felt
like I understood it until you told me
that I was good because the amount of
value you see if I had to purchase your
rights and I wrote arrive to what well
your asymmetric access to your labor
market I wrote a paper called migration
for the benefit of all published in the
International in the International
Journal of labor if every what the title
is migration for the benefit of all
which said if you pay people for their
rights
like if the baby boomers in silence said
look we think we can get better labor
outside and we want to pay you for the
right to shop elsewhere then the idea is
that everybody would have been better
off and we would have all screamed
Kumbaya to each other as we got rich
together but instead what they said is
you're a protectionist and a jingoist
and a xenophobe we loaded them up with
as much negative imagery as we could pop
you're just a bad person and they were
doing that though so they can get
cheaper labor right so they can keep you
from having leverage but you keep saying
it is well what we're willing to work
below but my point is is that if this
coffee mug
costs $10 and now we have 10,000 coffee
mugs it's not that those coffee mugs are
willing to be bought for less the entire
cost of coffee mugs plummets it's just
pushing out the supply curve on labor
and wages it's price so it behaved as
much as supply and demand should now you
can then point out you can make lots of
other arguments like well some of these
people are starting business and people
are not coffee mug
these are the most vibrant members of us
and say you know you cue Stars and
Stripes forever you put your right hand
over your heart but the key point was is
that all of these arguments were
necessary to keep the institutional
structure going as the Ponzi scheme ran
out and a lot of this has to do with
what I've called fake growth downsizing
offshoring immigration securitization
it's just this mind-numbing parade of
different techniques that these older
generations have used to keep a system
afloat that has been saying we're
exhausted like the law firms are
supposed to fail the universities are
supposed to fail all sort of the
newspapers are dying don't make sense as
a business model and things that you're
creating and that we all might create
would be replacing these things but
instead what we've done is we've come up
with an exotic kind of economic para by
osis where we're gonna transfuse our
fellow Americans and the younger
generations to pay for a group of people
who are just far too expensive to keep
living in the style to which they have
unjustly become accustomed so I'm sorry
about your hard stuff but I think that
there's a tremendous amount to be
excited about and enthusiastic about
because in an essence getting back to
your original point you're right about
the matrix for 50 years we've been in a
constellation of ideas suppressing the
really interesting new ideas and calling
names on anybody who would propose ideas
that would point out the unstable nature
of our market democracy and right now
what we're doing is we're living through
the beginning of a global low-grade
revolution of a type that we've never
seen before so tune in next time to find
out what happens how [__] I love that
it's a great place to end dude thank you
so much it was absolutely amazing I hope
this is part one I'd love to have you
back this is so [__] fun I could have
gone on really obviously for a lot more
time so thank you I am very keen to dive
through some more portals with you so
next time thank you so much thank you be
well peace out everybody till next time
be legendary later
[Music]
my first Eva knows that anxiety isn't
even that unpleasant it's so close to
excitement in its actual physiology that
really the difference between excitement
and anxiety is more or less just the
framing it's just the story you're
telling yourself